Welcome to the diffuse smap.
In this video you'll create a hand painted texture in the movie image editor and apply it to your models.
Now we've already created an image in the U.S. image editor.
That was great fun playing with those settings.
And now we're going to put those skills to the test that we can actually use on our models.
We'll be creating the diffused map from scratch.
And we'll also be explaining what the diffuse map does.
So before we continue let's start with that last point.
What is a diffuse map.
Well it is the most common map and it's the one most people think of when you say texture.
It defines the colours and patterns on a surface.
Now of course what we could do is build up a loaded geometry and then paint those little bits of geometry
different colours assign different materials to different faces and build it up that way.
So in a way a diffused map is a baking of detail that would be too arduous to do.
In fact we can get away with just painting it ourselves in many cases and we move onto more baking in
a few moments.
So diffused maps in general way they can be challenging to imagine a surface without a light source
or rather with a uniform light obviously without a light source would be completely pitch black.
So you often end up with quite bland looking textures.
Now that isn't a problem because we're going to make sure that the contrast is going to come from a
light source rather than baking it in to our diffuse map.
We're going to avoid creating detail that would usually be generated by bumps on the surface for instance
which means we're going to avoid painting shadows too.
That also means painting light in if we do that and I've said this word a couple of times.
This is called baking into the image.
And we do have to be careful that we dont do that.
If you go ahead and paint shadows and light into our diffuse map that can be great it can be a great
optimization.
However if you plan on changing the lighting in your scene this can cause some discontinuity with the
scene its in to the point that it looks out right.
Wrong because the shadows wont align with where they should be.
How we can use other types of maps specifically normal maps and displacement maps to control the way
that the lighting happens on the surface of our geometry.
Now we're not going to deal with that at the moment.
However we will touch upon those in a few lectures time.
So now let's go ahead and play with a few snaps and hop on over into blender.
Okay so we're back over in blender and the first thing I'm going to do is go work on a basic model and
the best one here is the wall piece that we've been working on.
Now I want to use the existing texture we've got as a kind of a reference for my block work it means
that we can almost apply it straight away to our model without needing to worry how we've got to make
a few tweaks first.
So one of the first things I've noticed and I'm going to have to change this in all my other files that
I have currently saved is that I am leaving the textures packed into the blend file and that's that
might cause me some problems later on when I think they're not packed and they in fact are.
So in this case I'm going to just go to file and external date I'm going to turn off the automatically
pack into blend and then I'm going to save the file also.
Don't forget that I'm going to unpack this image by clicking on the image.
Head to head at this box with a file in it that shows that it's packed clicked at.
Unpack do that.
And I'm going to use the file in original location and that should be absolutely fine use file and that's
fine.
We can go and check the Properties panel now and make sure it's linked to the right place.
That looks absolutely fine to me.
If I click on it I can see it's linked in the right places.
Not really much space there if I expand that we can see that it is there.
Until I run out of space completely anyway.
So now I've got that before I go and overwrite on this image.
I'm going to have to make sure I save a copy and I'm going to call this one.
Well I don't need it in my section assets so I need that in my texture's folder and I notice here it's
called a tiff.
Now I do prefer PND where possible so I'm going to call this church block work and on the left hand
side I'm going to make sure that I switch the savours image where the operator panel would usually be
over here.
I'm going to save it as a p n gene and do I need any compression.
A PRNG is lossless.
I don't think that's going to make too much difference.
Quite honest colour that I am going to go for 16 however and I'm not sure whether I am gonna include
our 4 channel.
So at this point in time with a warm texture Now I'm not going to include an out for Channel.
Some leave it as R G B.
Kate so that's fine.
I'm going to save as image.
That's great.
Can we pick it up from here yet.
No we can't say I'm going to go ahead and open up the image we've just save because that is important
and I will want to start working on the wrong image.
I'm going to go into texture's church block work.
There we go.
Well of course it will look exactly the same but the name will have changed down here and if we open
up the properties window we can see that ends in works.
There we go.
Church block work work.
Looks like I've typed block in twice.
Never mind I can deal with that later.
Okay so now we have that loaded in we can use it as a base to start working with.
But before we do anything else I just need to make sure that the actual texture is being applied over
in the 3D editor so I can see what happens as I update it.
Something will go down to the materials properties down here and because I've already loaded the church
block work.
I can select it there and that switch that one over.
And of course if I wanted it in the blender render I would also need to first of all not use nodes go
over to my texture's and switch it out down here scroll down.
Currently the cinder block.
We changed that over to the church block block.
I like that name up.
I think I'll keep it.
OK so now that we've done that we can go in and I'm just going to get rid of my 3D view for the moment
and just have a closer look at this.
I can use this to basically paint oversoul I've got a right scale.
I'm happy with my blockwork scale as it is at the moment so essentially this I'm not happy with this
particular texture.
It's a great place holder to make sure that the scale in everything else comes out about right.
Something to open up my tool shelf.
Go into painting mode so I can start doing something now before we do anything else.
This texture that we've got at the moment is a tiled texture.
Okay so we want to make sure that anything we do is also tiled and that is a real help especially if
we're putting lots of these together.
If we produce the image and it's untitled or not tiled we will end up with visible shifts in the texture
as it goes from one piece to another and we want to avoid that where possible because the moment we
introduce that it would look rubbish so we need to make sure they're tyred because we're going to have
them next to each other.
Lots Now over on the tool shelf of a bottom one by default is tiling and if we turn on x and y it means
that if we go off of one side of the image we come straight back onto the other.
Pretty effective and we can also from the top and bottom also do the same.
Pretty powerful.
Now if you want to see what this texture is looking like tiled that can be pretty difficult when it's
just a single image in the Properties window we can actually turn on tiling.
So down here under this splice out and get rid of the game properties under display they've got coordinates
and repeat.
If we put a tick in that box we can see it repeating.
The problem with this is we don't know where the edge of the image is anymore because this is a tile
texture is going to look pretty seamless so we can flick in and out of that to see how it's looking
in general as well.
Now this graffiti that are placed on the wall I'm going to undo for the moment and then I'm going to
close the properties panel.
I actually want it so I dont see the repeat and I can start painting.
Now one of the great things with painting obviously by hand you can get a lot of detail in.
However this is a wall so we may want to it depends on the type of wall you go for if you go in for
a bit more jagged blockwork you probably won't need straight lines but if you do want straight straight
lines you're going to have to select a different paint stroke.
So we go down in the tool shelf itself.
We can see paint stroke if we open that up.
We've got a stroke method and dropping down here we've got a series of options now the common ones that
I would use are space occasionally dots and definitely line.
The great thing about line is we can click and drag and we get a reasonably straight line.
The reason why it's bumped up over the top there and down here is because when we went from one side
to the other we actually went on to the other part of the image as you can see as I went down here.
I went onto the top of the next bit which would have been down here or indeed in this corner down here.
So that can be quite confusing at first when you're working with a tiled image.
But now when we put all of these bits together they will be seamless which is very powerful.
Let's just turn the repeat on and we can see that it is pretty seamless.
Now depending on how much detail you've got and how often it's repeated you kind of get that look and
feel especially from a distance that it is a repeated texture over and over.
The big ones here are these darker textures as we have a look at it.
We can see the repeating two blocks here here here here here etc..
And that really does stand out on my model.
So what I'm going to try and do is make sure that's essentially my brick work is a little more bland
than this one.
And then it sounds an odd thing to do but it's going to make it a bit more uniform the shapes.
However I can make a bit differently and make it a bit more exciting than the squares I think I'm going
to go for a more of an authentic kind of stone type look but I'm going to paint it and see what effects
I can do.
And of course with that I've got a challenge for you guys.
I would like you to paint they basic tile texture.
So start with the wall as it is the simplest piece that we have hand paint a new texture.
Now you can use the a reference image that we've got underneath and base based upon that.
Or of course you can do any other type of texture that you would like but still have that reference
image underneath because if we align it with that then we know it's going to work across our model without
scaling or manipulating our current TV maps.
If you do do something that's that much different you may have to adjust your you v map or create a
new one to match up with your texture.
Do make sure that the texture is tiled and avoid baking in highlights or shadows.
That is important will deal with those later on.
So Boser video now and give that a go.
Okay guys.
Welcome back.
Let's hop back on over into blender and paint a basic tile texture.
Okay so in front of us we have the wall textures.
I'm going to base upon.
I'm just going to see here if I can undo some of those changes brilliant I can.
Now I'm going to go for a slightly different colour going over the top of all this.
First of all I'm just going to block out my lines.
So I'm I've got tiling turned on got a line on there and if we move the cursor over I'm going to use
a mixture of my cursor and my iPad in front of me here.
Now we can see that that is just too big for a line that's going to look ridiculous.
I also need to turn up the strength initially otherwise is going to not do the job.
So I don't know quite how wide are my radius needs to be.
So let's go ahead and work it down to two and see what it's going to be about five.
By the looks of things and that could increase the strength undo those other ones that have just bought
on for testing.
And I'm going to actually use my mouse for this one.
Yeah that's absolutely fine.
So at the moment this is quite a fun task as you can probably see this drawing lines across the screen.
I'm going to go too far because if I get that wrong it will look horrible.
The other side as well.
So let's just make sure it's time.
But it's also lined up.
If we can avoid putting bumps on the side that be great.
Okay so what you do need to be careful is the very edge is very very easy to forget about the edges
like the top edge and the bottom edge.
Otherwise you end up with mega blocks without a line under them.
So I'm going to going to put a line there and you can see that would get a faint one on the bottom as
well.
And the same is true of these vertical lines.
So I'm going to paint these vertical lines and I'll see you back guys back in a few moments.
Okay.
So I think I'm pretty happy with that.
Of course I'm going to quickly hop out and going to repeat and just make sure that's repeating quite
well.
Okay.
I'm happy with that but so I'm going to come out of there and what I'm going to do now is I'm going
to lower the strength to or about there I think I add a little palette and I'm going to call it stone
work for the moment because that is essentially what it is going to be.
So we've got a stonework there.
And now let's go in.
Or I don't know a kind of creamy colour that I quite like that creamy colour I don't have a reference
image on me at the moment to have a look at but I'm going to stick with that for the moment and if I
say for the moment once more you can highlight that for me now.
Is that going to be enough for some of the increase the Phil threshold to one.
Oh no no no no no need to be less than 1.
Go ahead and try that again.
That looks pretty good to me.
That's getting most of the detail.
I want in a.
That's a I don't know what's going on here why won't accept input on there.
It's quite odd.
I can go in and paint it.
That's not a problem at all.
Of course this pixel size is quite small so I'm going to increase it now and keep the strength low and
going to make sure accumulate is turned off.
I want it to build up.
And what size of that brush.
That's pretty big.
I want to go over the image now and make the whole thing just a little bit faded.
I've got it online now.
Oh silly me I completely forgot I had it online.
That's why I wasn't moving this cursor around like a lonely search.
Of course you do need to change your brushstrokes I'm going to go back to space.
Now I should be able to go over the image and calls it these heavy lines to be a bit more faded and
now it's going to hit the F key and make this a bit smaller and do this area in here as well.
Okay so that gives me a rough idea of the guide.
I'm probably going to go over a couple more times and get this looking a bit better.
I'm not not going to go for the square fair I'm just going to use those as a basis and I will see you
guys back in a few moments.
But before I go what I will do here is I'm going to go into the colour picker and go and grab this mortal
line.
I like the colour of that and I'm going to add that is ever so slightly different.
But it will allow me to add the mortar kind of colour that I want into the model when necessary.
I see you guys back again in a few moments.
So I've done a bit of painting now and I just want to see how this texture is actually looking.
I've done the majority of the base sort of laraque and continue adding detail to this with the undulations
of the brickwork for instance.
But that's a good start for us.
Now I'm not using notes I'm guessing that's why I can't see my blockwork.
And there we go.
That is starting to look pretty good.
I think that's much better than the one we had but to begin with.
I'm not happy with some of the lines look a bit wobbly I'm not sure where that one is and I don't like
this one here so there's a few improvements that we can be done but that is coming along reasonably
well and is looking much more church like I suppose rather than knees or breeze block that we had before.
How are you guys getting on.
I hope you spent some time adding a bit more detail than I've got time for here.
Remember to share your brick work what have you come up with.
Have you gone full all of this creamy colour have you gone for a completely different style of block.
Have you gone for different shaped blocks more like some.
I can't think of like stone work where large stones are small stones or put together.
I'd love to see your results please post them in the discussions and I will see you guys in the next
lecture.